# Co:Create white paper: executive summary

**Create** is a decentralized protocol that provides incentive and governance mechanisms to NFT communities.
**Create** aims at solving NFT DAOs coordination issues using tokenomics, its implementations can benefit a wide variety of use cases, from NFT marketplaces to cooperative museums.

## Problem assessement

The properties of NFT contracts enable creators to reach global markets and directly benefit from the resale of their work.
Yet, NFT projects often suffer from structural limitations:
1. They lack an express governance token, which results in centralized decision-making.
2. They lack a robust economic model: the benefits generated by NFT projects are often shared only among a subset of stakeholders (NFTs and project owners).
3. They don't always foster innovative ecosystems: the tight coupling between smart contracts and client interfaces (e.g. marketplaces, games, and other decentralized applications) makes it challenging to build on top of their architecture.

The impact of NFTs projects would increase significantly if they were programmatically incentivized, governed by all their participants, and if they supported multiple clients serving different niches.

##  Solution overview

We propose a model that is both scalable and composable as it relies on Ethereum smart contracts.
This model provides a base protocol: **Create** and a "meta-protocol": **Co:Create** that can bind instances of **Create** to generate a web of NFT communities sharing the benefits derived from their growth.

**Create** addresses NFT communities' incentivization and governance needs by leveraging an ERC-20 token: $CO$.
This governance token:
1. Controls the minting and future royalty streams of NFTs.
2. Increases in value as NFTs become popular.
3. Grants governance rights to DAO members according to their participation.

**Create** provides a factory method that is similar to Uniswap's in that it allows for the creation of new instances of the Create Protocol. The native token of the protocol, $CO$, operates similarly to $UNI$ in that it gives governance rights to the Create Protocol and to the management of the Create treasury. This factory method allows instances of **Create** to form a contractually linked ecosystem of instances, which form the **Co:Create** protocol. 

##  Technical overview

**Create's** Solidity implementation is a set of contracts that binds NFTs minting, sales, royalty streams, and governance to $CO$, an ERC-20 token. We refer to this mechanism as *ProtocolControlled NFTs*.

Closer to the metal, **Create** runs on Ethereum, anyone can spin up an instance of the protocol to create and manage their own NFT community. The protocol is open to everyone and does not require any trusted party.

**Create** contracts are open source and composable: on both input & output, syntactically and morphologically. Any Dapp can be built on top of them: marketplaces, games, events that require NFTs for access, etc...

The protocol provides a set of rules for minting, managing royalties, tokens, a DAO, and a treasury. Each **Create** instance can be customized for a community's needs. 

## **Create** tokenomics

The protocol acts as a coordination system providing a common incentive for all participants since they all benefit from the token's value increase. 
The token accrues demand for a limited supply of NFTs if they become popular, and it is distributed among participants according to the value they add, thus motivating the whole community and generating interest.


**Create**'s Protocol-Directed Minting offers a way for DAOs to mint and auction off NFTs, with the proceeds going to the creators, collections holders, and the DAO treasury. This ensures that tokens are distributed to those who contribute to the network, that NFT sales result in demand for the token, and that for highly aspirational NFT projects, a broader group can become part of the community.

Block rewards are denominated in the native token and accrue to the treasury according to a regular schedule. The NFT DAO may use the treasury to purchase existing NFTs, rather than minting them through the protocol. A voting threshold for purchasing is set, similar to the voting threshold for minting, and a proposer proposes a purchase in the same manner that they would propose a mint, by staking a certain amount of token and putting the proposal up for a vote.

## **Co:Create** tokenomics

The **Co:Create Protocol** allows NFT communities to benefit from each others' value creation

The native token of the protocol, $CO$, operates similarly to the UNI token.
It grants governance rights in the **Co:Create** Protocol and management rights over
 the **Create** treasury.

The protocol distributes governance over the instance to those who contribute most to it, in other words, those who set up successful instances of the Create Protocol (weighted by how early
they set up their instance).
We do this by introducing a hub-and-spoke exchange. Each instance, rather
than retaining 100% of the tokens they receive, retains most of the tokens, and
sends a small amount to the **Co:Create** treasury.

In exchange, the **Co:Create** treasury will grant the **Create** instance treasury $CO$ tokens,
equivalent in value to the token exchanged, minus a small protocol fee. 

With this mechanics, the more active instances get more governance voice on the **Co:Create**
Protocol, and the **Co:Create** Protocol can bootstrap a diversified portfolio/treasury.


## Conclusion

The **Co:Create** Protocol is a new pattern that uses a token economic model to bootstrap application ecosystems, incentive mechanisms, and governance paradigms around NFT communities. We expect this pattern to enable a variety of use cases, including community-driven marketplaces, influencers networks, forest stewardship DAOs, and more that have yet to be ideated.
